1. download HxD, fasmw , and qemu. 
2. time to startup the bootloader . listen, for this part, i first did a solo bootloader - assembled it - put it on a lil disk file - and ran w qemu. unfortunately this booted nothing but worked
moving on, i learned that bootloaders typically have 2 parts 
1st part usually boots the second part.
ya bios originally works w/ about 512 bite space. thats not a lot. you're gonna use this space to load your second part into the memory.
2nd part - this one does the magicks. with more space to work around, now we're in part two. this should typically:
Setup 16-bit segment registers and stack
Print startup message
Check presence of PCI, CPUID, MSRs
Enable and confirm enabled A20 line
Load GDTR
Inform BIOS of target processor mode
Get memory map from BIOS
Locate kernel in filesystem
Allocate memory to load kernel image
Load kernel image into buffer
Enable graphics mode
Check kernel image ELF headers
Enable long mode, if 64-bit
Allocate and map memory for kernel segments
Setup stack
Setup COM serial output port
Setup IDT
Disable PIC
Check presence of CPU features (NX, SMEP, x87, PCID, global pages, TCE, WP, MMX, SSE, SYSCALL), and enable them
Assign a PAT to write combining
Setup FS/GS base
Load IDTR
Enable APIC and setup using information in ACPI tables
Setup GDT and TSS

but dont worry about it yet. 
3. i setup a live flash with linux distro. :( my entire working environment is now portable buuut unfortunately i forgot that live sessions delete everything on exit. 
on the to-do list is to partition a small part of my flash (the same flash, yes) just for my project.
todo cancelled: that's actually not gonna work. The bootable flash can't be read from the booted system. aka the live linux i've got running can't access the project partition. rip
todo, new: re-do the live linux into a (dead) portable linux so i can keep my damn files. Why did I decide it would be cool/secure to make a live distro? help.
4. okay, you're wondering where to go from here. time to build a kernel. part 2 needs to boot a kernel, after all, and i'm not sure how this is all supposed to combine and compile, so i've started
searching for  yt tutorials. the OSDev wiki is scary, but don't worry and just read on. These things will start to make sense eventually, i'm sure...
after looking through linux distros with tears in my eyes, i've found 2 - puppyLinux and Tails. I'm going to go with tails, as it seems to be more in tune with USB sticks and overall saving data while keeping the amnesia aspect. 
I did not consider this and find it interesting, so perhaps I WILL ADD THIS IDEA TO THE FINAL PROJECT.
speaking of the final project, i've noticed that when downloading other OS-es to try , it usually gives me a .img (disk file)... perhaps I should've gotten the memo sooner, but the final project needs to be in .img or .iso format.
I'm ... well, I guess, that's how you're supposed to store an OS. (yes, perhaps, i should've known this sooner).
Big new problem. the Tails OS is incredibly slow and forces me to use TOR browser. fuck security.. and fuck this flash! why is it so slow? cry. i also can't use root commands because "having root permissions would negate the purpose of the OS!" YOUR MOOOOOTHEEEEERRRRRRRRR
okay its okay. we're gonna continue rawdogging it on windows. except i can't run docker on windows, which i would've loved to have for the 99% of tutorials online. its okay. we're gonna do it with other tools.
so far my biggest struggles come from setting up the environment lmfao... i need a PC that can run over 2mph with FULL root access everywhere all the time (i'm gonna install 3k packages per project before shoving it all on github and baptising the hdd)
speaking of, it would  be awesome to have an hdd to do this on. like a spare one. but who just has a spare hdd lying around?
.... I do.
TODO:
put the spare HDD into a usb caddy. use it instead of the flash as a portable environment. please.
TIP: DID YOU KNOW YOU DIDNT HAVE TO GO TO BIOS TO CHANGE UR OS ?? U CAN PRESS THE WINDOWS KEY, HOLD SHIFT WHILE YOU PRESS POWER-RESTART , KEEP HOLDING IT, AND FROM THE BLUE LOOKIN MENU IN -OTHER DEVICES - CHOOSE YOUR FLASH. YYESS GAWDDD (SOB)

day2:
let's try building the kernel. just something simple so far, no need to cry... its gonna be ookay baby!
- i'm having trouble making the disc floppy img. windows doesn't have many tools for it. I had ChatGPT make me a .bat (windows batch file) and it.. helps. i guess there's a function to make them in windows..?
haha having the whole compiler in one space is neat! i dont have to assemble every time and make a new disc and so on, i can just run ths lil batch file. love bat files. 
ALR ~!!!! WE HAVE A KERNEL WITH NOTHING IN ITTT. AND ITS CONNECTED TO THE BOOTLOADER (CRY)
\yipeeeEEEEEEE BUEHEHEH. we also added everything to the github <3
- environment troubles: most tutorials assume i'm on linux, and use linux tools. unforutnately this isn't the case, and i shall sooner rather than later hit a block in my path. i have got a github setup, now time to setup my linux.
- Tail has been tried and doesn't work because no root access. rip.

a kernel has been made. time to add stuff to it..
-first part: a file system. i decided on FAT32 after careful consideration. "The boot record contains both code and data, mixed together. The data that isn't code is known as the BPB." First we must implement the boot record uwu.

