1. download HxD, fasmw , and qemu. 
2. time to startup the bootloader . listen, for this part, i first did a solo bootloader - assembled it - put it on a lil disk file - and ran w qemu. unfortunately this booted nothing but worked
moving on, i learned that bootloaders typically have 2 parts 
1st part usually boots the second part.
ya bios originally works w/ about 512 bite space. thats not a lot. you're gonna use this space to load your second part into the memory.
2nd part - this one does the magicks. with more space to work around, now we're in part two. this should typically:
Setup 16-bit segment registers and stack
Print startup message
Check presence of PCI, CPUID, MSRs
Enable and confirm enabled A20 line
Load GDTR
Inform BIOS of target processor mode
Get memory map from BIOS
Locate kernel in filesystem
Allocate memory to load kernel image
Load kernel image into buffer
Enable graphics mode
Check kernel image ELF headers
Enable long mode, if 64-bit
Allocate and map memory for kernel segments
Setup stack
Setup COM serial output port
Setup IDT
Disable PIC
Check presence of CPU features (NX, SMEP, x87, PCID, global pages, TCE, WP, MMX, SSE, SYSCALL), and enable them
Assign a PAT to write combining
Setup FS/GS base
Load IDTR
Enable APIC and setup using information in ACPI tables
Setup GDT and TSS

but dont worry about it yet. 
3. i setup a live flash with linux distro. :( my entire working environment is now portable buuut unfortunately i forgot that live sessions delete everything on exit. 
on the to-do list is to partition a small part of my flash (the same flash, yes) just for my project.
todo cancelled: that's actually not gonna work. The bootable flash can't be read from the booted system. aka the live linux i've got running can't access the project partition. rip
todo, new: re-do the live linux into a (dead) portable linux so i can keep my damn files. Why did I decide it would be cool/secure to make a live distro? help.
4. okay, you're wondering where to go from here. time to build a kernel. part 2 needs to boot a kernel, after all, and i'm not sure how this is all supposed to combine and compile, so i've started
searching for  yt tutorials. the OSDev wiki is scary, but don't worry and just read on. These things will start to make sense eventually, i'm sure...
after looking through linux distros with tears in my eyes, i've found 2 - puppyLinux and Tails. I'm going to go with tails, as it seems to be more in tune with USB sticks and overall saving data while keeping the amnesia aspect. 
I did not consider this and find it interesting, so perhaps I WILL ADD THIS IDEA TO THE FINAL PROJECT.
speaking of the final project, i've noticed that when downloading other OS-es to try , it usually gives me a .img (disk file)... perhaps I should've gotten the memo sooner, but the final project needs to be in .img or .iso format.
I'm ... well, I guess, that's how you're supposed to store an OS. (yes, perhaps, i should've known this sooner).
Big new problem. the Tails OS is incredibly slow and forces me to use TOR browser. fuck security.. and fuck this flash! why is it so slow? cry. i also can't use root commands because "having root permissions would negate the purpose of the OS!" YOUR MOOOOOTHEEEEERRRRRRRRR
okay its okay. we're gonna continue rawdogging it on windows. except i can't run docker on windows, which i would've loved to have for the 99% of tutorials online. its okay. we're gonna do it with other tools.
so far my biggest struggles come from setting up the environment lmfao... i need a PC that can run over 2mph with FULL root access everywhere all the time (i'm gonna install 3k packages per project before shoving it all on github and baptising the hdd)
speaking of, it would  be awesome to have an hdd to do this on. like a spare one. but who just has a spare hdd lying around?
.... I do.
TODO:
put the spare HDD into a usb caddy. use it instead of the flash as a portable environment. please.
TIP: DID YOU KNOW YOU DIDNT HAVE TO GO TO BIOS TO CHANGE UR OS ?? U CAN PRESS THE WINDOWS KEY, HOLD SHIFT WHILE YOU PRESS POWER-RESTART , KEEP HOLDING IT, AND FROM THE BLUE LOOKIN MENU IN -OTHER DEVICES - CHOOSE YOUR FLASH. YYESS GAWDDD (SOB)

day2:
let's try building the kernel. just something simple so far, no need to cry... its gonna be ookay baby!
- i'm having trouble making the disc floppy img. windows doesn't have many tools for it. I had ChatGPT make me a .bat (windows batch file) and it.. helps. i guess there's a function to make them in windows..?
haha having the whole compiler in one space is neat! i dont have to assemble every time and make a new disc and so on, i can just run ths lil batch file. love bat files. 
ALR ~!!!! WE HAVE A KERNEL WITH NOTHING IN ITTT. AND ITS CONNECTED TO THE BOOTLOADER (CRY)
\yipeeeEEEEEEE BUEHEHEH. we also added everything to the github <3
- environment troubles: most tutorials assume i'm on linux, and use linux tools. unforutnately this isn't the case, and i shall sooner rather than later hit a block in my path. i have got a github setup, now time to setup my linux.
- Tail has been tried and doesn't work because no root access. rip.

a kernel has been made. time to add stuff to it..
-first part: a file system. i decided on FAT32 after careful consideration. "The boot record contains both code and data, mixed together. The data that isn't code is known as the BPB." First we must implement the boot record uwu.

I fixed MY PC ~!! YIPEE? Now i've got my env setup forreals. AND I finally figured out my idea - so, what makes my bootloader unique? Imma let it "boot-load" whatever the heck. Who said it's gotta be an OS? Let it load anything the bios can. Use bios tools and boot me a gif, an img, a project, an .iso, a - heck, a txt. Let it try. Let it conquer. I want it to be able to "bootload" whatever the heck, starting with scripts.
The stuff its gonna boot will be on the same flash.
Here's the basic goal - bootloader project, slap it on a flash with literally anything else, and on startup (when selected device to boot from is said project flash) my bootloader'll do its best to boot whatever the heck is on the flash, aside from it. 
Let it boot nonsense. Isn't that fun? 
With the idea done, let's see how we'll implement. 
It currently runs the kernel in the same subfolder, but I need it to run *anything* in this subfolder (which will probably be hard and use gypsie-level gimmicks), and maybe implement... girl, idk, am I gonna need drivers? Can the basic bios functions do me good? I guess it's time to find out.

hey friend, new run technique just dropped. please just go ./build.sh in the terminal :).

a bit of knowlege to present during the presenting stage on monday:
"When a PC powers on, here’s what the BIOS (or UEFI in modern systems) does:

    Power-On Self Test (POST): Checks CPU, RAM, and basic hardware.

    Boot Device Selection: Based on your BIOS settings or boot order (e.g., USB → HDD → CD), it picks the first device that claims to be bootable.

    Reads Sector 0 (LBA 0): BIOS reads the very first 512 bytes of that device. This is the boot sector — no filesystem is parsed at this point. It doesn't care what format the device is (FAT32, NTFS, ext4 — irrelevant).

    Looks for the Boot Signature:

        It checks if the last two bytes are 0x55 and 0xAA (in that order, little endian: 0xAA55).

        This is a signal that "I’m executable boot code!"

    Loads to memory at 0x7C00: BIOS loads those 512 bytes into memory at address 0x7C00.

    Jumps to 0x7C00: Execution begins — the CPU starts running your 16-bit real mode boot sector code.:
" this will help people understand how the BIOS gets to the bootloader on startup
- next stage of presenting, what a BOOTLOADER does.

Current requirements when building (be careful)
bootloader0 - 1st sector of the disk
bootloader1 - 2 to 5th sectors
kernel - from the 6th onwards
type of FS: FAT12
- be careful when making the floppy to specify these^

TODO: bootloader1 has to implement a FS. This has been decided as FAT12 after (not very long) consideration.

PSA: terribly late of me to notice this, but it doesn't matter what the size of the source code file is. bootloader0.asm can be 3kb if it wants, because this includes white spaces and comments and so on. What matters is the assembled binary output - .bin file - now THAT'S gotta be exactly 512 bytes. And it is. 

The floppy being created is now being created in FAT12. I made the presentation and removed unnecessary comments ( i hope) from the rest of the porject. Let this document be the only evidence left of my meltdowns and hardships.
The kernel is currently not being run by the second stage. The problem comes from the FAT12 phrasing - the second stage can't get any data from the FAT12 boot sector on 0th sector. It returns all nulls. This means there's problems with the formatting, or the second stage's idea of a formatting, which ... yeah, i'm rambling, but that means we can't move on to connect it to the kernel.

day4:
ahem, ya girl is back from spring break, and finally read the OSDEV wiki. Weeee're gonna need a GCC cross platform compiler. don't ask, i don't k now, the wiki said so, so we're doing it. im also on linux mint now.
- on compiler bootstrapping : uhh, wow? i didn't know ts was so complicated. Okay so, we need the same version of the compiler for the OG and the cross - which i'm just gonna push as the lastest gcc ver. atp in time it's 13.3.0 .
! er, also, it would be great to include Trello screenshots in the final version. Yes, just fake it if you gotta..!! TT
day5: Today we're gonna setup cross-compiling. Yes, we had that setup before. Yes, we have to do it again. I changed systems, remember? 
Finally, It's been decided that we're doing a 32-bit kernel first. GRUB (a community bootloader) works only for 32bit , and it's supposedly an easier starter.

please verify that these tools are available, from now on:
gcc --version
ld --version
as --version
nasm --version
grub-mkrescue --version
also, these dependencies : build-essential bison flex libgmp3-dev libmpc-dev libmpfr-dev texinfo wget
and, yeah, a new and ADVANCED FLAVOUR of binutils! as if we didn't download 3 million of these tools already !

verify the availability of your new cross compiler: 
i686-elf-gcc --version
i686-elf-as --version

PS. I set up the 32-bit cross-compiler (i686-elf) while being very sick. Everybody, please clap? you'll find it at $HOME/opt/cross/bin, and it's added to PATH.
TODO: recover and un-corrupt the images from your old partition since it seems to be.. 'unlocked' now. yeah, don't ask.

NEXT up, configuring GRUB. (i am loosing my sparkle , but my fingers itch to get started. This is the last hurdle before full-on kernel development, so let's just do it)
PS. The entire repository has been renamed to "diploma project 2025". The old name was "proektna praktika 2025". I'm going to polish the github around this time so it doesn't cause problems in the future. 

oct7 
The repository has been cleaned up and submitted. Starting GRUB configuration.
- installed dependencies: grub-pc-bin, xorriso

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
In kernel folder to make the kernel.elf
i686-elf-gcc -ffreestanding -m32 -O2 -Wall -Wextra -c kernel.c -o kernel.o
i686-elf-gcc -ffreestanding -nostdlib -m32 -T linker.ld -o kernel.elf kernel.o
Shove the new kernel.elf in isodir/boot
In isodir momma run this to make the iso: 
grub-mkrescue -o myos.iso .
To run with qemu:
qemu-system-i386 -cdrom myos.iso
qemu-system-x86_64 -cdrom myos.iso

verify iso contents:
xorriso -indev myos.iso -ls /boot
verify elf contents:
readelf -h kernel.elf

or you could load the kernel directly without an ISO:
qemu-system-i386 -kernel kernel.elf

oct8
Raspberry pi OS - btw yours is a raspberry pi 5 ! To Throw apart the legacy 32 bit version.
- Kernel should be the same as some of the debian ones.
- OS for rm models ?

oct12
Bought an sd card and finally configured the raspberry :) . Should I make a system for it? Or start with a simple port reading? I'm so excited :2

oct13
- 'metodologiq' which is a part of your documentation, make sure it's handwritten lol.
- presentation with little diagrams for the conceptual part, and then little debugger stuff that works :) slide for motivation/context/what's the point of it all?
Kernel updates, we're working on I/O. Today we've implemented a naked environment, CPU is fully in control:
what's going on there:
1. The bootloader (GRUB) hands control to kernel.elf in protected mode
2. the kernel:
Writes to video memory directly
Enters an infinite loop so the CPU doesn’t return to GRUB

 I'm going to put an abstraction layer on top and start building a console, maybe support with BIOS calls after.
TODO -No syscalls, no filesystem, no standard library, no memory allocator.paging is off (yipee)(to enable)
| You want to... | You must...                            |
| -------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| Print text     | Write to VGA memory (like 0xB8000)     |
| Read keyboard  | Handle interrupts from PS/2 controller |
| Use storage    | Implement disk driver                  |
| Manage memory  | Implement paging/heap/allocators       |
| Handle files   | Build a filesystem layer               |


We currently can use in kernel code: CPU instructions, function calls, stack frames.

Oh my gosh, did you know that int and long change their size based on compiler/architecture?:
The size of int is equal to sizeof(int). The size of an int is really compiler dependent. Back in the day, when processors were 16 bit, an int was 2 bytes. Nowadays, it's most often 4 bytes on a 32-bit as well as 64-bit systems. 
you learn something new every day. This means we can't use our beloved unsigned integers in the kernel code... aw, jeez.

Currently goes into grub , then my kernel, but there's somehing wrong with the kernel.. its stuck in a reload loop. at least we're dealing with code now lol. 
TODO: setup gdb!

! uninitialized memory works as a loop. don't go there.
update: OMAGASH!! IT WORKS!!!! WOWOZERS!!! IT WOOOORKSSSS IT GOES INTO THE KERNEL, SETS UP THE STUPID STINKIN' TERMINAL AND SO ON !!! LETS GOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
step 0/100 complete, lol. Now to actually make the kernel XD!

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
new command line for assembling the header, compiling the kernel, linking , and finally shoving to qemu. IM THE BEST???

assembling multibootheader: 
nasm -f elf32 multiBootHeader.asm -o multiBootHeader.o
compiling kernel:
gcc -m32 -ffreestanding -c kernel.c  -o kernel.o
linking em:
ld -m elf_i386 -T linker.ld -o kernel.elf multiBootHeader.o kernel.o
qemu:
qemu-system-i386 -kernel kernel.elf
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
or use the makefile (from kernel folder):
make // everything goes in build folder
make run //runs the elf in there
make clean //removes build folder

oct21
uh, multiboot time. aka memory map time. aka into the unknown territory.
Okay, apparently there's 2 multiboot headers: multiboot1 (older, and widely supported, and easier on the tutorials) and multiboot2 (newer, "more flexible" , gives more information, still supported by qemu and grub, but apparently a bit harder to start on).
It'll be harder to swtich later so we're making decisions now - and im deciding on multiboot1 , which is just FINE for a hobby OS (we aren't striving for perfection). What's worrying me is that multiboot2 is "future proof" and multiboot1 may not be supported later... but ain't that a problem for future me? haha
So, now that we have decided on multiboot1 we're going to get the memory map in kmain.

oct27
Memory map down. It's currently being outputted to the screen. All functions are in a memap.c file. oh in the multibootheader.asm , the ebx register gets pushed (passed) to kmain, because this is where GRUB stores the memory map pointer. There are two structures that get some data passed to them ... aghh...
I also changed all the functions to follow the case conventions - functions with camel snake case, and variables with camel case. I felt it to be prettier.
The terminal is now pink. ( took exactly one change)
erm... im pretty happy with the memory map, so i'm going to be working more on the terminal functionality. First things first , I/O. Which means keyboard driver. Which means starting on the external drivers. Which opens another can of worms i was avoiding till now. The PIC (Programmable Interrupt Controler), hardware interrupts, and ports. Time to worry about the 0x60 port, "the data port", scancodes, and how to integrate all of that into code. (not excited about this part)
funsies are officially finished, time for bios interrupts (sad).
A few things to do:
    - inter -process communication
    - a way for programs to allcocate and free data 

Forget it , we're not working on the terminal, first we need to set up some more memory stuff (agh, i hate memory stuff, agh, why is this the main focus of my project? i just don't understand it, i guess, and it's hard to debug - what am i even looking at ?!)


oct 28th
We need to implement physical memory, virtual memory, and  a way for programs to allocate it at all... aghh.... TT. why, god , why?? (what have i gotten myself into, pt1).
- Four general models of memory usage in most programs, including operating systems: read-only memory, static global memory, lexically allocated memory, and dynamically allocated memory. 
okay  , buddy , let's get to the physical memory before the virtual memory. Let's implement it... let's do it .. !!


nov 10th
i took a lil break, sue me. what was i doin before? i seem to be lacking a keyboard driver, but if memory recalls, i had memory issues too..? er
i configured hithub copilot. if theres weird stuff i blame it. (i am aware that machines cannot take responsibility)

"i wanted to make a physical memory allocator. i was wondering if i should make it in kernel or memap.c? the memap was just for the memory map so i wanted to leave it alone and clean, but i dont know if ti would be better to be there? or should i make its own file for physical memory allocation and call the functions in kernel? somehow that seems to be the best solution, doesn't it? well you give me advice. first we need to set up paging - since my kernel already knows all usable ram ranges (memap functions ) we need to put those ranges into fixed-size pages and make a bitman for those pages. im thinking 4kb pages" - im loosing my mind


nov 11th
I'm not really sure if I'm ready to go back to basics, but did you know that ROM is about 12mbs and only stores vital information to start the system, like the firmware, the BIOS UEFI. It's what the CPU runs first on power on. And it's pre-programmed by the person who made the device, because it's a non-programmable chip on the motherboard.
In summary, ROM is just another way to call the BIOS chip on the motherboard. It's also called an SPI chip.
It contains:
Power-on initialization code
Hardware configuration tables
Boot device selection logic
Option ROMs for device
The firmware setup UI

and is NOT re-programmable. I mean, it is, but there is no reason for me to tinker 'round there right now. Although I want to. I'm a bit curious. But we've got bigger problems right now!!!

//The PC does have writable memory (RAM) — temporary.
Persistent storage (SSD/HDD) is separate hardware accessed through drivers and filesystems.
The kernel manages RAM directly and storage indirectly.
ROM is just firmware, not general storage or memory.//

so , about volatile/permanent memory. RAM's our bestie right now , but let's forget about permanent storage for the time being. let's focus on configuring our RAM allocator.
- THE PHYSICAL MEMORY ALLOCATOR IS ONLY  A RAM ALLOCATOR, PERMANENNT MEMORY IS ON "EXTERNAL" DEVICES AND ISN'T MANAGED BY THE CPU

conclusion: ABOUT RAM
🍓 highest-level allocators: kernel heap alloc/user-space memory management management
🍓 on top is the virtual memory layer - Maps virtual addresses to physical pages using the page tables, handles process isolation, when it needs a new page, calls the phys mem allocator
🍓 on bot is physical memory allocator - paging, RAM pages, tracks which are free/used , provides pages to sybsystems 

Now that we know a bit more, we can start writing code! I'm thinking of making the physical pages first, and track them, today. The question of whether they should be in the kernel or not remains, but I recon everything memory-management related should be. Well, nevertheless, I'm shoving them in a new file to keep my kernel "clean". Just remember to put an important star on it.

Back to learning, now about paging. There's contiguous and scrambled pages. A small amount of devices expect and absolutely need a continious page alignment. Others request normal pages (which can be anywhere). What we're gonna do is split it into two:
- a small ("edicated contiguous pool tracked by a bitmap") BITMAP in front that's continuous. This pool services DMA/firmware/driver requests that require physically contiguous pages.

- a longer ("buddy allocator for the general pool") BUDDY SYSTEM in the back that's scrambled - page order doesn't matter
ofc the virtual allocator won't be helpoing those devices get memory, but the kernel, so it's not going to touch the first BITMAP at all.
Physical: [A][B][C][D] + [E][H][J][K][F][G][I][L]  (C-pool + G-pool)(continuous and general)
Virtual : [H][E][K][I][J][L][G][F]
Contiguous use → [A–D]


TODO:

Parse firmware memory map. Mark usable ranges.

Pick contiguous region(s) for C-pool. Prefer low-high contiguous ranges reported usable. Carve them out and mark as C-pool.

Initialize C-pool bitmap over that region.

Initialize G-pool buddy allocator over remaining usable pages.

Mark both pools in the global page bookkeeping so nothing else grabs those pages.

//
Bitmap for C-pool (practical)

Use uint64_t words. 1 = used, 0 = free.

Fast ops: ~word, __builtin_ctzll, __builtin_popcountll.

Provide find_run(npages) that scans words, uses ctz on word-by-word runs to find a contiguous run of npages.

Keep a hint cursor to avoid scanning from 0 each time.

Lock per-pool for SMP (spinlock).
//
Buddy for G-pool (practical)

Orders from order_min = 0 (1 page) to order_max (largest power-of-two block).

Free-lists per order. On alloc, find smallest order >= npages. If not available, split larger block down. On free, try to merge with buddy.

Maintain a small secondary bitmap if you want quick emptiness checks per order (optional).

Lock per-order or per-region for concurrency.
//
Interaction between pools

Keep separate metadata. The global physical bitmap can mirror both pools for debugging/inspection, but operations should be local for speed.

If C-pool exhausted, choose policy:

Fail allocation and return NULL.

Try to allocate from G-pool and attempt to create a physically contiguous chunk by compaction (expensive) — avoid this in early kernel.

Signal user that host lacks contiguous memory.
//